AI-READI: rethinking AI data collection,  
preparation and sharing in diabetes research  
and beyond

https://doi.org/10.1038/s42255-024-01165-x

AI-READI Consortium

Here, we introduce Artificial Intelligence 
Ready and Equitable Atlas for Diabetes 
Insights (AI-READI), a multidisciplinary 
data-generation project designed to create 
and share a multimodal dataset optimized 
for artificial intelligence research in type 2 
diabetes mellitus.

The AI-READI project is one of four Data Generation Projects (DGPs) 
funded by Bridge2AI (https://commonfund.nih.gov/bridge2ai), a 
new NIH Common Fund Program aimed at setting the stage for the 
widespread adoption of AI in healthcare research. The primary goal 
of AI-READI is to collect and publicly share a multimodal, AI-ready 
dataset for studying the pathogenesis and salutogenesis (that is, the 
pathway from disease to health) of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM).

T2DM is a growing public health threat, affecting >6% of the 
world’s population, and at increasingly younger ages. Certain popu-
lations experience a greater burden of disease, exacerbating health 
disparities. Our data collection effort is centred around the prin-
ciple of collecting a large multimodal dataset uniformly balanced 
for T2DM severity from a diverse group of participants so as to bet-
ter understand this complex multifactorial disease using AI. Given 
the  complexity  of  T2DM,  AI-based  approaches  and  multimodal 
model  development  may  improve  our  understanding  of  T2DM.  

 Check for updates

However, a major barrier has been the lack of diverse datasets that are 
AI ready1 for training AI models, which the AI-READI project is designed 
to address.

Here, we present the AI-READI dataset, give preliminary insights 
into our blueprint for making data AI-ready and provide our ongoing 
strategies for training a diverse workforce at the intersection of AI  
and biomedical research.

Introduction to the AI-READI dataset
AI-READI is enrolling 4,000 participants at three study sites over 4 years 
(2022–2026) (Supplementary Fig. 1). We plan to balance the racial and 
ethnic diversity of participants to address the under-representation in 
past research studies of groups that bear a higher burden of the disease. 
Having three data collection sites will increase geographic represen-
tation. Participants with a range of health states will be included to 
facilitate AI-based research into salutogenesis.

The recruitment process consists of a selection of individuals 
based on the available clinical diagnosis using ICD-10 codes and demo-
graphic data from the electronic health records of study sites. Each 
participant completes the study protocol, which includes question-
naires, on-site data collection and at-home data collection (Fig. 1). 
Blood is being collected to establish a large repository of participant 
plasma, serum and buffy coats at the University of Alabama at Birming-
ham. In addition, we are collecting PaxGene RNA tubes for future RNA 
isolation and cryopreserving peripheral blood mononuclear cells for 
future studies that could include functional immunologic studies or 
generation of induced pluripotent stem cells.

Pre-visit
(1 hour, at home)

Self-reporting surveys
• Initial screening
• Demographic
• Center for Epidemiological Studies

Depression Scale (CES-D)-10

• Problem areas in diabetes questionnaire (PAID-5)
• Diabetes score
• Diet
• Smoking history
• Alcohol use, vaping and marijuana use
• General health
• Social determinants of health (SDoH)
• Visual impairment and eye care access

Data collection

On-site visit
(3 to 4 hours)

Current medicine list

Driving record
(accident report)

Monofilament test

Vision testing
(lensometer, autorefraction
best corrected visual acuity,
letter contrast sensitivity)

Retinal imaging
(undilated/dilated fundus 
photography, FLIO, OCT, 
OCTA)

Blood test
(NT-proBNP, C-peptide, troponin-T,
HbA1c, lipid panel, CRP, CMP12)

Physical assessment
(height, weight, waist and hip
circumferences, blood pressure,
heart rate)

Biospecimen
(blood)

Urine test
(albumin, creatinine)

ECG

Cognitive screening

Post-visit
(10 days, at home)

Continuous glucose monitoring

Physical activity monitoring
(heart rate, respiration rate, activity type, SpO2, 
stress level, sleep phases)

Environmental measurements
(temperature, humidity, light spectrometry, PM1.0, 
PM2.5, PM4.0, PM10.0, NOx, volatile organic 
compounds)

Fig. 1 | Data collection protocol for each participant in AI-READI.  
Each participant who enrols in the AI-READI study completes the study  
protocol, which includes pre-visit questionnaires, on-site data collection  
and post-visit data collection for 10 days using a Dexcom G6 for continuous 
glucose monitoring, Garmin Vivosmart 5 for physical activity monitoring and 

a custom-built environmental sensor for indoor environmental parameter 
measurements. ECG, electrocardiogram; FLIO, fluorescence lifetime imaging 
ophthalmoscopy; OCT, optical coherence tomography; OCTA, optical coherence 
tomography angiography ; PM, particulate matter.

nature metabolism

Volume 6 | December 2024 | 2210–2212 | 2210

CommentEach data collection site uploads data at regular intervals to a 
cloud-based data management platform (FAIRhub) that is being devel-
oped for this project. Data are released annually, and each version is 
accessible through FAIRhub. At each release, two datasets are made 
available: a controlled-access set and a publicly accessible set with 
fewer requirements for access. The public set is stripped of Protected 
Health Information (PHI), as defined by the HIPAA (Health Insurance 
Portability and Accountability Act) Privacy Rule via the “Safe Harbor” 
method, as well as information related to the sex and race/ethnicity of 
the participants to prevent stigmatization of findings. The first version 
of the public set was recently shared using a new licence developed 
as part of this project that allows reuse for any purpose but includes 
restrictions to protect participant privacy2.

Blueprint for future data-generating projects
An additional aim of the AI-READI project is to share our blueprint for 
collecting and sharing AI-ready datasets so that future DGPs can follow 
them (Supplementary Fig. 2), including guidelines for project manage-
ment, as well as data collection, management and sharing (https://
zenodo.org/communities/aireadi; https://github.com/AI-READI; 
https://aireadi.org).

The integration of multiple disciplines has become a cornerstone 
for discoveries and innovation in biomedical research, so the successful 
preparation of an AI-ready dataset must be a multidisciplinary team 
effort3,4. Therefore, an essential component of AI-READI is to imple-
ment team science strategies to understand the interaction patterns 
of our multi-team systems and then disseminate our findings (Sup-
plementary Fig. 3).

We believe that, at a high level, making data AI ready involves two 
main sets of considerations: technical and ethical. The FAIR (find-
able, accessible, interoperable, reusable) principles provide high-level 
instructions for making data technically ready for reuse by AI systems2. 
As part of the project, we are developing guidelines for making data 
types from the AI-READI project FAIR. We are using existing standards 
when available and working with their maintainers to extend them 
when necessary (Supplementary Table 1). We are also developing new 
standards, such as the Clinical Dataset Structure (CDS), a simple and 
intuitive way to organize clinical research datasets and include struc-
tured metadata (https://cds-specification.readthedocs.io).

Data used in developing AI systems are often a major source of 
downstream ethical issues5. To prevent such issues, ethical, legal and 
social implications are considered at every stage of the project cycle. 
Documenting practices regarding the creation, use and maintenance 
of clinical research datasets is critically important so that AI developers 
can easily understand the provenance and intended use of the data. We 
are reviewing existing documentation approaches such as datasheets 
and healthsheets to identify the most suitable one for biomedical 
data6,7. Al algorithms can infer individual patient characteristics and 
could facilitate individual-level identification. To prevent reidentifi-
cation attempts, we are implementing a robust data dissemination 
system, a strict licence agreement and data watermarking for both 
public and controlled sets.

Preparing and sharing AI-ready datasets can rapidly become time 
consuming and difficult for data-collecting researchers. To address this 
problem, we are developing a cloud-based data management, curation 
and sharing platform called FAIRhub (https://fairhub.io/). Inspired by 
existing user-friendly ‘FAIRification’ tools, the platform is being devel-
oped to include intuitive user interfaces and a suite of tools to simplify 
and automate the implementation of our guidelines for making data AI 

ready8. After testing FAIRhub for the AI-READI dataset, we anticipate 
making the platform available for future DGPs desiring to manage and 
share AI-ready clinical research datasets.

American Indians and Alaska Natives (AI/AN) are unique and highly 
identifiable groups that could benefit from precision health AI studies. 
Through engagement with the Native Biodata Consortium, this project 
will provide a co-learning opportunity for understanding challenges 
specific to AI/AN communities and evaluating tools for addressing 
them, such as data usage agreements, contracts negotiations, transpar-
ent access agreements and some form(s) of assured return of benefit 
and sustainable input, control and monitoring of Tribal data.

Training future AI researchers
Concerns regarding bias and inequity in AI have been partially attrib-
uted to the lack of diversity in the AI workforce. In particular, women 
and racial and ethnic minority groups are under-represented.

The Bridge2AI Program has therefore defined workforce devel-
opment as one of its key pillars. AI-READI hosts a year-long research 
internship programme (https://shileyeye.ucsd.edu/research/ai_readi) 
to provide immersive training for individuals interested in working at 
the nexus of biomedicine and AI. The programme includes a 2-week 
data science/programming bootcamp followed by a yearlong curricu-
lum of didactic lectures and mentored research. Interns are mentored 
by one or more AI-READI investigators and are involved in various 
aspects of the project, including developing healthsheets to describe 
the AI-READI data, mapping project data into common data models, 
and analysing equity and ethical issues. The inaugural cohort in aca-
demic year 2023–2024 consisted of 10 interns, among whom 70% were 
women, 30% were Black and, overall, 50% were from under-represented 
backgrounds based on NIH criteria. The programme is continuing 
broad outreach and recruitment efforts and is disseminating its strate-
gies to serve other similar programmes.

Discussion
The AI-READI project is ambitious in scope and may be viewed as a 
milestone in the field of big data and AI health research. We expect 
that the flagship dataset will lead to novel discoveries into the T2DM 
pathogenesis and salutogenesis while benefiting a broader population, 
given the diversity of the study participants. In addition, our blueprint 
has the potential to remove one of the major bottlenecks to the wide-
spread use of AI in healthcare: the availability of data that is off-the-shelf 
ready for AI-based analysis.

AI-READI Consortium*
*A list of authors and their affiliations appears at the end of the paper. 

Published online: 8 November 2024

References
1.  Wilkinson, M. D. et al. Sci. Data 3, 160018 (2016).
2.  Contreras, J. et al. License terms for reusing the AI-READI dataset. Zenodo https://doi.org/ 

10.5281/zenodo.10642459 (2024).

3.  Hackman, J. R. & Katz, N. Handb. Soc. Psychol. 2, 1208–1251 (2010).
4.  Lemieux-Charles, L. & McGuire, W. L. Med. Care Res. Rev. 63, 263–300 (2006).
5.  Abràmoff, M. D. et al. NPJ Digit. Med. 6, 170 (2023).
6.  Gebru, T. et al. Commun. ACM 64, 86–92 (2021).
7.  Rostamzadeh, N. et al. In Proceedings of the 2022 ACM Conference on Fairness, 

Accountability, and Transparency 1943–1961 (Association for Computing Machinery, 2022).

8.  Patel, B., Soundarajan, S., Ménager, H. & Hu, Z. Sci. Data 10, 557 (2023).

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the US National Institutes of Health (NIH) through grants 
OT2OD032644 and P30 DK035816. We thank the Microsoft AI for Good Lab for supporting the 

nature metabolism

Volume 6 | December 2024 | 2210–2212 | 2211

Commentcloud services needed for the project. We thank Topcon Corporation (Tokyo, Japan),  
Optomed (Oulu, Finland), iCare World (Raleigh, NC) and Carl Zeiss (Oberkochen, Germany)  
for loaning their devices for research purposes at no cost. We thank Heidelberg Engineering 
(Heidelberg, Germany), Dexcom (San Diego, CA) and Garmin (Olathe, KS) for research discounts 
on study devices. We also thank the study participants and the AI-READI Advisory Council.

Author contributions
The Writing Committee members created the first draft, which was reviewed, edited and 
approved by all the authors.

Competing interests
S.B.: funding — NIH, University of California Office of the President, Research to Prevent 
Blindness; consultant — Topcon; equipment — Optomed. V.R.d.S.: funding — NSF, UCSD 
Social Sciences, Sanford Institute for Empathy and Compassion (Center for Empathy and 
Technology), Intel, Mathworks, UCSD instructional improvement grant, equipment funding 
from Adobe and NVIDIA, Kavli Institute for Brain and Mind, IBM, past funding from Sony; 
member — Cognitive Science Society Governing Board. K.F.: member — Institutional Review 
Board for the All of Us Research Program, Digital Ethics Advisory Panel for Merck KGaA  
(Merck Germany). C.S.L.: funding — NIH, Alzheimer’s Disease Drug Discovery Foundation, 

Gates Ventures, Research to Prevent Blindness. T.Y.A.L.: funding — Research to Prevent 
Blindness, Dr. H. James and Carole Free Career Development Award. B.P.: funding — NIH. 
L.M.Z: funding — NEI, NIH, The Glaucoma Foundation, Heidelberg Engineering, DRCR Retina 
Network/JAEB Center for Health Research, The Krupp Foundation; receipt of equipment, 
materials, software — Optomed, ICare, Topcon, Heidelberg Engineering, Carl Zeiss Meditec, 
Optovue/Visionix; consultant — Abbvie, Topcon Medical Systems; co-founder, inventor, 
board member, equity holder — AISight Health Inc. S.H.: funding — NIH, NIH/NARCH, RWJF, 
UCSD Herbert Wertheim School of Public Health. H.I.: funding — NIH; founder, stock holder 
— Gobiquity, Inc. A.Y.L.: funding — Santen, Topcon, Carl Zeiss Meditec, Regeneron, Amazon, 
Meta, Research to Prevent Blindness; personal fees — Genentech, Sanofi, US FDA, Johnson 
and Johnson, Boehringer Ingelheim, Gyroscope; non-financial support — iCareWorld, 
Optomed, Heidelberg, Microsoft. S.M.: Funding — NIH, Edward P. Evans Foundation, OHSU 
Knight Cancer Institute; receipt of in-kind contribution — Nike. C.N.: funding — NIH, NSF, 
PCORI. C.O.: consultant — Johnson and Johnson. L.H.: funding — NIH Grant UL1TR001442; 
consultant — Bristol Myers Squibb. The remaining authors declare no competing interests.

Additional information
Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material available at  
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42255-024-01165-x.

AI-READI Consortium

Writing Committee

Sally L. Baxter 
T. Y. Alvin Liu2, Julia P. Owen4, Bhavesh Patel 

  1, Virginia R. de Sa 

  5, Qilu Yu 

  6 & Linda M. Zangwill1

  1, Kadija Ferryman2, Prachee Jain3, Cecilia S. Lee 

  4, Jennifer Li-Pook-Than3, 

Principal Investigators

Amir Bahmani 
Hiroshi Ishikawa 
Camille Nebeker 

  3, Sally L. Baxter1, Christopher G. Chute 

  2, Jeffrey C. Edberg7, Kadija Ferryman2, Samantha Hurst 

  1, 

  8, Cecilia S. Lee4, Aaron Y. Lee 
  1, Cynthia Owsley7, Bhavesh Patel5, Sara J. Singer3 & Linda M. Zangwill1

, T. Y. Alvin Liu2, Gerald McGwin7, Shannon McWeeney 

  4 

  8, 

Research, Technical and Clinical Staff

Riddhiman Adib8, Mohammad Adibuzzaman8, Arash Alavi 
  8, 
Marian Blazes4, Aaron Cohen8, Benjamin Cordier8, Katie Crist1, Colleen Cuddy3, Virginia R. de Sa1, Aydan Gasimova5, 
Nayoon Gim 
Jessica Mitchell2, Caitlyn Ngadisastra4, Victoria Patronilo 

  2, Prachee Jain3, Trina Kim4, Jennifer Li-Pook-Than3, Wei-Chun Lin 
  4, Sanjay Soundarajan 
  1, Jamie Shaffer 

  8, 
  5 & Kevin Zhao 

  4, Adrienne Baer3, Erik Benton 

  3, Catherine Ashley 

  4, Stephanie Hong 

  4

Project Managers

Caroline Drolet 

  4, Abigail Lucero 

  8, Dawn Matthies7, Julia P. Owen4, Hanna Pittock 

  3, Kate Watkins3 & Brittany York1

Interns

Charles E. Amankwa1, Monique Bangudi1, Nada Haboudal 
  1, Apoorva Karsolia1, Hadi Khazaei 
Fritz Gerald P. Kalaw 

NIH Program Scientists

Xujing Wang11 & Qilu Yu6

  1, Shahin Hallaj 
  8,9, Muna Mohammed 

  1, Anna Heinke 

  1, Lingling Huang 

  1, 

  10 & Kyongmi Simpkins1

1University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA. 2Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA. 3Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.  
4University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA. 5FAIR Data Innovations Hub, California Medical Innovations Institute, San Diego, CA, USA. 6National Center 
for Complementary and Integrative Health, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA. 7University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA. 8Oregon Health & 
Science University, Portland, OR, USA. 9Portland State University, Portland, OR, USA. 10Meharry Medical College, Nashville, TN, USA. 11National Institute of 
Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK), NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA. 

 e-mail: leeay@uw.edu

nature metabolism

Volume 6 | December 2024 | 2210–2212 | 2212

Comment