Opinion

Voice as an AI Biomarker of Health—Introducing Audiomics

Voice, speech, and respiratory sounds provide impor-
tant clinical insights into patients’ health status. In the
age of artificial intelligence (AI), patients’ audio record-
ings are being investigated as digital biomarkers for early
detection of a broad range of conditions, including la-
ryngeal pathology, neurological and psychological dis-
orders, head and neck cancers, and diabetes. Besides
neurologists, speech language pathologists, and inter-
nists, otolaryngologists also have unique perspectives
and expertise on voice, speech, and respiratory sounds
that can fuel this line of research and innovation.

While the potential of using voice as a biomarker of
health has been explored for decades, development
of recent technology such as machine learning (ML)
(a branch of AI focusing on predictive algorithms that
learn from data without explicit instructions) allows for
efficient analysis of a voice data and makes discovery
of scalable acoustic biomarkers a possibility. The im-
pact of such a discovery on patient care could be sub-
stantial, including in screening, diagnosis, remote moni-
toring, and development of new digital end points for
clinical trials.

Although the future of voice biomarkers is promis-
ing, there remain important limitations to broad inte-
gration into clinical care. Within academic research, many
studies1,2 remain at the level of proof of concept with
small- to medium-sized datasets often using voice as the
only data type. Comparing studies and pooling data are
challenging tasks due to the lack of standards in how we
collect voice and speech data. Within the industry, data-
sets are often private, limiting the ability to audit ML
models and the accuracy of training data labels.

Herein, we highlight the need to define and create
standards for “audiomics,” the interdisciplinary field of
audio analysis applied to biomedicine to identify unique
audio biomarkers of health and disease. Recent ad-
vances in data science have set the stage for the emer-
gence of new “omics,” that is, data science subfields
founded on a large amount of data representing the
structure or function of a biological system.3 Examples
of such omics subfields include radiomics, genomics,
proteomics, and, more recently, videomics, referring
to the application of omics in video analysis, such as
endoscopy.4 Videomics was developed for gastrointes-
tinal endoscopy for lesion identification during colonos-
copy and has recently been expanded to endoscopy vid-
eos in otolaryngology.5 Central to omics are efforts
toward standardization of data collection, storage, and
analysis and ongoing discussion of ethical and regula-
tory challenges, which will take simple acoustic analy-
sis to a new level. Otolaryngologists have a rare oppor-
tunity with audiomics to contribute to cutting-edge
medicine by sharing how voice, speech, and respira-
tory sounds may be interpreted in the context of hu-
man health and by guiding the collection of acoustic data

at scale to offer populationwide solutions. Tangible use
cases in otolaryngology include voice screening for de-
tection and monitoring of laryngeal cancer in at-risk
populations for timely referral, or remote voice moni-
toring in spasmodic dysphonia for assessing botulinum
toxin response to fine-tune and personalize treatment.
Among digital biomarkers, voice, speech, and
respiratory sounds are particularly attractive due to
their noninvasive, accessible, and low-cost collection in
the setting of recording capability via computers or
smartphones.1 These digital data have come in focus in
the age of automated speech recognition systems and
large language models, with unparalleled ability to ana-
lyze voice and speech. Furthermore, digital biomarkers
are increasingly sought as clinical data outcome mea-
sures for therapeutics, particularly in the pharmaceuti-
cal industry. Such data could overcome limitations of
clinical trials and research ethics concerns, such as time
required for participant enrollment, challenges related
to intervention delivery, data collection burden, and lack
of diversity among enrolled participants.

Many industry giants, such as Pfizer, Mozilla,
Amazon, Google, and Apple, and start-ups are invest-
ing millions in research and development of voice,
speech, and respiratory sound biomarkers.6 Although
the industry has access to vast amounts of voice data
from users, it lacks access to accurate clinical data or
demographic information. This deficiency limits the abil-
ity to annotate data for AI training and to compare
algorithmic outputs with criterion standard medical as-
sessment and prevents external auditing of datasets
used for training to ensure fair representation of di-
verse populations.

Despite significant advances, important limitations
currently prevent implementation of voice biomarkers
in clinical care. Despite considerable literature1,2 pub-
lished especially in the past decade, there is a lack of pro-
spective study and validation of AI algorithms in audiom-
ics on external datasets. These factors, compounded by
the limited size, quality, and diversity of existing open-
source datasets, likely explain the lack of validated and
US Food and Drug Administration–approved AI algo-
rithms for disease detection and monitoring in this space.
When ML applications from screening and diagnosis of
laryngeal cancer were considered, researchers found that
most studies reported training datasets of fewer than
300 patients, and only 2 studies used more than 1 data
modality to train their models, limiting generalization of
the results.7 Furthermore, audiomics will inevitably need
to be integrated in multi-omics efforts, in which audio
data are analyzed together with other health data, such
as clinical, imaging, and even genomic data, for im-
proved accuracy. When a patient presents with a dys-
phonic voice, we clinicians inquire about duration of
symptoms and smoking history to gauge risk of laryn-

VIEWPOINT

Yaël Bensoussan, MD,
MSc
USF Health Voice
Center, Department of
Otolaryngology–Head
& Neck Surgery,
University of
South Florida Health
Morsani College of
Medicine, Tampa.

Olivier Elemento, PhD
Englander Institute for
Precision Medicine,
Weill Cornell Medicine,
New York, New York.

Anaïs Rameau, MD,
MPhil
Sean Parker Institute
for the Voice,
Department of
Otolaryngology–Head
and Neck Surgery,
Weill Cornell Medicine,
New York, New York.

Multimedia

Corresponding
Author: Yaël
Bensoussan, MD, MSc,
Division of
Laryngology, USF
Health Voice Center,
Department of
Otolaryngology–Head
& Neck Surgery,
University of
South Florida Morsani
College of Medicine,
13330 USF Laurel Dr,
Tampa, FL 33609
(yaelbensoussan@usf.
edu).

jamaotolaryngology.com

(Reprinted) JAMA Otolaryngology–Head & Neck Surgery April 2024 Volume 150, Number 4

283

Downloaded from jamanetwork.com by University of Colorado user on 12/05/2025

© 2024 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
© 2024 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.

Opinion Viewpoint

geal cancer. Machine learning models trained on voice data need the
same type of multimodal integration to achieve scalable accuracy.
For audiomics to be implemented and reach its full public health
potential, the following tripartite agenda must be met: (1) stan-
dards for audiomics data acquisition, interoperability, and AI readi-
ness must be defined; (2) diverse teams with broad skills and ex-
pertise, including clinicians, engineers, bioethicists, and social
scientists, must collaborate in this complex field; and (3) the unique
ethical and legal challenges in audiomics linked to the Health Insur-
ance Portability and Accountability Act, potential reidentification
of patients by their voice, voice hacking, and data ownership call for
a new governance framework for issues concerning diversity, data
handling, and privacy safeguards.

Through the Bridge2AI program, an endeavor to leverage team
science in AI sponsored by the National Institutes of Health Com-
mon Fund, our team, Bridge2AI-Voice, gathered 50 multidisci-
plinary experts from 12 North American institutions to generate
high-quality, ethically sourced datasets for biomedical research
to advance the field of audiomics. Besides our primary deliverable
to build a publicly available database of 30 000 human voices, our

team aims to address current gaps in the burgeoning field of au-
diomics by (1) ensuring quality and accuracy of acoustic data and as-
sociated clinical data through clinical validation and evidence-
based recording protocols; (2) aiming for interoperability of data by
creating new bioinformatics standards for voice data; (3) creating
benchmarks of diversity metrics and minimizing risk of algorithmic
bias; (4) defining ethical and legal norms safeguarding patients’ data
while supporting data-sharing efforts; (5) developing infrastruc-
ture for audiomics data storage sharing within and across research
institutions; and (6) formulating training pathways for scientists, en-
gineers, bioethicists, and clinicians to develop skills in audiomics.

The only scalable way to achieve such a complex endeavor and
implement change beyond the current hype around acoustic bio-
markers is to bring experts from different fields, including otolar-
yngologists, speech pathologists, data scientists, AI engineers, bio-
ethicists, and acousticians, to collaborate and build a solid, ethically
sourced infrastructure for voice data collection linked to other health
data. In this way, the Bridge2AI-Voice data generation project serves
as a model from which current and future generations of audiom-
ics researchers can learn.

ARTICLE INFORMATION

Published Online: February 22, 2024.
doi:10.1001/jamaoto.2023.4807

Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Elemento
reported owning equity in Owkin and in Volastra
Therapeutics outside the submitted work.
Dr Rameau reported receiving grants from the
National Institute on Aging and owning equity
in Perceptron Health, Inc, and Savorease, Inc,
outside the submitted work. No other disclosures
were reported.

Funding/Support: All authors are funded
by Bridge2AI award OT2 OD032720 from the
National Institutes of Health Common Fund.

Role of the Funder/Sponsor: The National
Institutes of Health had no role in the preparation,
review, or approval of the manuscript or the
decision to submit the manuscript for publication.

Additional Contributions: We thank the following
members of the Bridge2AI-Voice Collaborators
for their contributions to the Bridge2AI program:
Drs Bensoussan, Elemento, and Rameau as well
as Jean-Christophe Bélisle-Pipon, PhD, Faculty of
Health Science, Department of Health Ethics,
Simon Fraser University; David A. Dorr, MD, MS,

Department of Health Informatics and Clinical
Epidemiology, Oregon Health Sciences University;
Satrajit S. Ghosh, PhD, McGovern Institute,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology; Alistair
Johnson, PhD, Division of Biostatics, Hospital for
Sick Children; Philip R. O. Payne, PhD, Institute
for Informatics, Data Science and Biostatistics,
Washington University School of Medicine in
St Louis; Maria Powell, PhD, CCC-SLP, Department
of Otolaryngology–Head & Neck Surgery, Vanderbilt
University Medical Center; Vardit Ravitsky, PhD,
The Hastings Center; and Alexandros Sigaras, MS,
Englander Institute for Precision Medicine,
Weill Cornell Medicine. None were directly
compensated for their contributions.

REFERENCES

1. Fagherazzi G, Fischer A, Ismael M, Despotovic V.
Voice for health: the use of vocal biomarkers from
research to clinical practice. Digit Biomark.
2021;5(1):78-88. doi:10.1159/000515346

2. Idrisoglu A, Dallora AL, Anderberg P,
Berglund JS. Applied machine learning techniques
to diagnose voice-affecting conditions and
disorders: systematic literature review. J Med
Internet Res. 2023;25:e46105. doi:10.2196/46105

3. Micheel CM, Nass SJ, Omenn GS, et al.
Omics-based clinical discovery: science, technology,
and applications. In: Evolution of Translational
Omics: Lessons Learned and the Path Forward.
National Academies Press; 2012. doi:10.17226/13297

4. Dai X, Shen L. Advances and trends in omics
technology development. Front Med (Lausanne).
2022;9. doi:10.3389/fmed.2022.911861

5. Paderno A, Holsinger FC, Piazza C. Videomics:
bringing deep learning to diagnostic endoscopy.
Curr Opin Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2021;29(2):
143-148. doi:10.1097/MOO.0000000000000697

6. Apple introduces new features for cognitive
accessibility, along with Live Speech, Personal
Voice, and Point and Speak in Magnifier. Apple
Newsroom (Canada). May 16, 2023. Accessed
July 24, 2023. https://www.apple.com/ca/
newsroom/2023/05/apple-previews-live-speech-
personal-voice-and-more-new-accessibility-
features/

7. Bensoussan Y, Vanstrum EB, Johns MM III,
Rameau A. Artificial intelligence and laryngeal
cancer: from screening to prognosis: a state of the
art review. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2023;168
(3):319-329. doi:10.1177/01945998221110839

284

JAMA Otolaryngology–Head & Neck Surgery April 2024 Volume 150, Number 4 (Reprinted)

jamaotolaryngology.com

Downloaded from jamanetwork.com by University of Colorado user on 12/05/2025

© 2024 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.

