TITLE: The Gabriella Miller Kids First Data Resource for genomic research in pediatric cancer and congenital anomalies.
SOURCE URL: https://www.ebi.ac.uk/europepmc/webservices/rest/search?query=EXT_ID:42607672&format=json&resultType=core
CAPTURED AT: 2026-09-14T03:17:35.751431+00:00

DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2026.07.010
PMID: 42607672
First publication date: 2026-08-17
Authors: Higgins DM, Blackden C, Brown M, Diaz C, Duffy L, Friedman C, Guo Y, Koptyra M, Li Q, Lubneuski A, Miller D, Moulder B, Payton W, Reed E, Rife W, Sickler A, Singh N, Warkow A, Wenger E, Wong J, Zhang B, Zhong C, Zhu Y, Altefrohne G, Beauregard D, Costanza J, Girard E, Langis LF, Lemonnier L, Paul A, Pelletier C, St-Onge K, Thibert JP, Mattioni M, Saha S, Rozowsky J, Trboljevac M, Zecevic M, Knight J, Kuffel G, Reddy R, Ribeyre P, Farrow B, Cox Y, Ericson A, Vargas JF, Forman S, Labrecque S, Torstenson E, Ho KY, Vasilevsky NA, Boja E, Cotton V, Daee D, Fournier MV, Guidry Auvil JM, Harris AC, Li H, Wang L, Davis-Dusenbery B, Haendel MA, Lilly J, Storm PB, Volchenboum S, Grossman RL, Carroll R, DiGiovanna J, Taylor D, Ferretti V, Resnick A, Heath AP.

ABSTRACT:
Nine-year-old brain tumor patient Gabriella Miller challenged members of Congress to "stop talking and start doing" when providing federal funding for research into cures for pediatric cancer and congenital anomalies. Though she ultimately lost her life to that cancer, her advocacy efforts resulted in the 2014 Gabriella Miller Kids First Research Act, launching the Gabriella Miller Kids First Pediatric Research Program at the National Institutes of Health (NIH). The overarching goal of the Gabriella Miller Kids First Pediatric Research Program is to help researchers uncover new insights into the biology of childhood cancer and congenital anomalies. Following the signing of the Gabriella Miller Kids First Research Act 2.0 in January 2025, the program has been extended at NIH through 2028 to advance the groundwork laid in the program's first ten years. The Gabriella Miller Kids First Data Resource Center has since honored her legacy by building a comprehensive data resource for genomic research into pediatric conditions. Data from more than 30,000 participants annotated with demographic and clinical information related to their diagnoses have been released for secondary research and analysis using the center's web-based platforms. This paper analyzes the outcomes of the initiative and highlights breakthroughs made by the larger research community resulting from the availability of this data resource. We explore the future expansion of the data resource to include new modalities and tools for supporting life-saving research for children like Gabriella Miller.
